>> Brangham: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, OCTOBER 9:
REPUBLICANS DISTANCING
THEMSELVES FROM DONALD TRUMP, AS
BOTH PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES GET
READY FOR THEIR SECOND DEBATE.
ASSESSING THE DAMAGE FROM
HURRICANE MATTHEW ALONG THE
ATLANTIC COAST.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
FROM UTAH: THE EFFORT TO GET
MORE WOMEN INVOLVED IN POLITICS.
>> WOMEN MAKE UP MORE THAN HALF
OF THE POPULATION, AND YET WE
HAVE SUCH A SMALL PERCENTAGE OF
WOMEN WHO ARE MAKING POLICY
DECISIONS.
>> Brangham: NEXT ON "PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>> FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
>> Brangham: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
AS THE HOURS COUNT DOWN TO THE
SECOND DEBATE BETWEEN HILLARY
CLINTON AND DONALD TRUMP
TONIGHT, THE NUMBER OF
REPUBLICANS PUBLICLY WITHDRAWING
SUPPORT FOR TRUMP CONTINUES TO
GROW.
IN THE PAST TWO DAYS, SINCE THE
RELEASE OF AN 11-YEAR-OLD
VIDEOTAPE SHOWING TRUMP TALKING
IN SEXUALLY AGGRESSIVE AND CRUDE
TERMS ABOUT WOMEN, MORE THAN 40
GOVERNORS, SENATORS, AND MEMBERS
OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
HAVE ANNOUNCED THEY'’VE JOINED
THE LIST OF CURRENT AND FORMER
REPUBLICAN OFFICIALS WHO WILL
NOT VOTE FOR THEIR PARTY'’S
NOMINEE.
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE HOUSE ETHICS
COMMITTEE, REPRESENTATIVE
CHARLIE DENT OF PENNSYLVANIA,
TOLD "ABC NEWS" TODAY THAT A
YEAR'’S WORTH OF INFLAMMATORY
COMMENTS BY TRUMP IS ENOUGH.
>> FROM DIMINISHING JOHN
MCCAIN'’S SERVICE AS A P.O.W., TO
MOCKING THE DISABLED, TO THE
ETHNIC SMEARS AGAINST MEXICANS
AND MUSLIMS, THE DAVID DUKE
DEBACLE, THE INDIANA JUDGE, THE
KHAN FAMILY, MISS UNIVERSE AND
HER WEIGHT, AND NOW THIS.
LOOK, WILL DONALD TRUMP WITHDRAW
FROM THE RACE?
NO.
SHOULD HE?
YES.
>> Brangham: TRUMP HAS CONTINUED
TO SAY HE WON'’T QUIT THE RACE,
AND ONE OF HIS TOP ADVISERS,
FORMER NEW YORK CITY MAYOR RUDY
GIULIANI, TOLD "NBC NEWS" TODAY,
HE SHOULDN'’T.
>> HE WAS SELECTED BY MORE
REPUBLICAN VOTERS THAN ANYONE
HAS EVER BEEN SELECTED IN A
REPUBLICAN PRIMARY.
HE OWES THEM THE DUTY TO RUN.
IT IS TRUE THAT HE SAID
SOMETHING AND SAID A GROUP OF
THINGS DURING THAT INTERVIEW
THAT ARE REPREHENSIBLE AND
TERRIBLE AND AWFUL, AND HE FEELS
TERRIBLE ABOUT IT.
>> Brangham: IN AN ATTEMPT TO
CHANGE THE CONVERSATION, THE
CONSERVATIVE NEWS WEBSITE
BREITBART NEWS, WHICH HAD BEEN
RUN FOR THE LAST FOUR YEARS BY
TRUMP CAMPAIGN CHAIRMAN STEPHEN
BANNON, TODAY POSTED INTERVIEWS
WITH THREE WOMEN WHO HAVE
ACCUSED BILL CLINTON OF SEXUALLY
AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR IN THE PAST.
TRUMP QUICKLY CALLED ATTENTION
TO THE INTERVIEWS ON TWITTER.
ONE OF THE WOMEN, JUANITA
BROADDRICK, ALLEGES CLINTON
RAPED HER IN 1978, WHEN HE WAS
THEN ATTORNEY GENERAL OF
ARKANSAS.
IT'’S A CHARGE HE DENIES, ONE
WHICH HAS NEVER BEEN PROVEN, AND
WAS DISMISSED 15 YEARS AGO IN A
CIVIL SUIT BROUGHT BY
BROADDRICK.
WHEN CLINTON AND TRUMP MEET
TONIGHT FOR THE SECOND OF THEIR
THREE DEBATES, IT WILL BE AT
WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY IN ST.
LOUIS.
THE NEWSHOUR'’S JOHN YANG IS
THERE, OUTSIDE THE DEBATE HALL,
AND HE JOINS ME NOW FOR A
PREVIEW.
SO JOHN, TONIGHT WAS
GOING TO BE AN IMPORTANT DEBATE
EVEN BEFORE FRIDAY'’S REVELATIONS
CAME OUT.
AND WE'’VE SEEN OVER THE LAST TWO
DAYS TRUMP GETTING REALLY BEATEN
UP FOR THESE COMMENTS.
BUT WE'’VE ALSO SEEN LATE TODAY
THAT TRUMP IS HINTING VERY
STRONGLY THAT HE MIGHT BRING UP
SOME OLD ALLEGATIONS AGAINST
BILL CLINTON.
IS THIS A SIGN OF THINGS TO
COME?
>> WILLIAM, WE DON'T REALLY
KNOW.
THE ONLY PERSON WHO DOES KNOW IS
DONALD TRUMP.
WE'VE SEEN RUDY GIULIANI, MAYOR
GIULIANI ON THE TALK SHOWS THIS
MORNING SAYING HE DIDN'T THINK
IT WOULD COME UP.
THAT MAY HAVE BEEN HIS ADVICE TO
DONALD TRUMP BUT THE ONLY PERSON
WHO REALLY KNOWS WHETHER IT'S
GOING TO COME UP IN THE DEBATE
IS DONALD TRUMP.
THIS COULD BE A SHOT ACROSS A
WARNING SHOT AS IT WERE, TO
HILLARY CLINTON AND THE CLINTON
CAMPAIGN THAT IF SHE BRINGS UP
ON HER OWN THE TAPE THAT CAME
OUT ON FRIDAY, THIS IS WHAT WILL
COME IN RESPONSE.
BUT YOU KNOW, IT'S INTERESTING.
I HAVE BEEN TALKING TO PEOPLE
WHO HAVE BEEN PREPPING OTHER
CANDIDATES IN THE PAST, OTHER
NOMINEES FOR TOWN HALL EVENTS.
THEY'RE NOT TALKING TO A
MODERATOR.
REPORTER.
SO MAKING A TERM LIKE THAT, AND
GOING AFTER YOUR OPPONENT IS
GOING TO BE A TRICKY THING.
SO IT'S GOING TO BE INTERESTING
TO SEE WHAT DOES HAPPEN TONIGHT.
>> WE'VE BEEN SEEING OVER THE
LAST COUPLE OF DAYS THIS RASH OF
DEFENSES, OF GOP OFFICIALS
SAYING ENOUGH IS ENOUGH.
WE'RE GOING TO ABANDON TRUMP.
I'M CURIOUS, RIGHT NOW, IN YOUR
MIND HOW MUCH OF THIS IS ABOUT
PRINCIPLE, THAT THEY JUST CAN'T
ABIDE BY WHAT WAS REVEALED ON
THIS TAPE.
AND HOW MUCH OF THIS IS JUST
ABOUT POLITICAL SURVIVAL?
>> THE QUESTION IS GOING INTO
NEXT WEEK, AFTER THIS
PERFORMANCE TONIGHT, AGAIN,
DEPENDING ON WHAT KIND OF
PERFORMANCE DONALD TRUMP HAS
TONIGHT, WILL THIS SPREAD WIDER.
WILL OTHER POLITICIANS, HOUSE
CANDIDATES, MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE
JOIN IN?
I THINK THIS IS, WE DON'T KNOW
YET.
THERE ARE A LOT OF SHOES YET TO
FALL AND THE FINAL SHOES MAY NOT
FALL UNTIL SOMETIME MID WEEK.
>> JUST QUICKLY, I WONDER IF THE
THE GOP ELDERS WHOEVER THOSE
ACTUALLY MAY BE, DECIDE THEY DO
WANT TO GET TRUMP OFF THE
BALLOT.
DO THEY HAVE A WAY, A MECHANISM
TO DO THAT?
>> THEY CAN'T DO IT ON THEIR
OWN, WILLIAM.
THEY WOULD HAVE TO-- TRUMP WOULD
HAVE TO WITHDRAW.
BUT EVEN THEN IT'S TRICKY
BECAUSE YOU'VE GOT 50 STATE
LAWS, 50 STATE RULES ABOUT
BALLOTS.
BALLOTS HAVE ALREADY BEEN
PRINTED AND YOU KNOW, WILLIAMS,
BALLOTS HAVE ALREADY GONE OUT.
PEOPLE ARE ALREADY VOTING IN A
LOT OF STATES, EITHER IN PERSON
OR ABSENTEE BALLOTS.
THIS WHOLE THING IS UNCHARTERED
WATERS, NO ONE KNOWS WHERE THIS
COULD GO.
>> THE NEWSHOUR'S JOHN YANG,
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
WE'LL SEE YOU LATER TONIGHT.
>> THANKS, WILLIAM.
AS JOHN YANG MENTIONED,
TONIGHT'S DEBATE WILL BE A TOWN
HALL FORMAT, WITH VOTERS JOINING
THE MODERATORS IN ASKING
QUESTIONS.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT JEFF GREENFIELD
REPORTS, THAT FORMAT HAS TRIPPED
UP MANY CANDIDATES IN THE PAST.
>> Reporter: THIS IS WHAT MOST
DEBATES LOOK LIKE-THE CANDIDATES
AT A LECTERN.
AND MANY RECENT PRESIDENTIAL
DEBATES HAVE FEATURED THE
CANDIDATES AND THE MODERATOR
SITTING DOWN AT A TABLE.
BUT TOMORROW'S DEBATE FEATURES A
VERY DIFFERENT FORMAT: A "TOWN
HALL" MEETING, IN WHICH
UNDECIDED VOTERS-SELECTED BY THE
GALLUP ORGANIZATION-PUT
QUESTIONS DIRECTLY TO THE
CANDIDATES.
IT'S A FORMAT THAT OFFERS
SPECIAL OPPORTUNITIES-AND
PITFALLS.
FOR INSTANCE, A QUESTION CAN
SOMETIMES BE UNCLEAR, AS IN THIS
EXAMPLE FROM 1992.
>> HOW HAS THE NATIONAL DEBT
PERSONALLY AFFECTED EACH OF YOUR
LIVES?
AND IF IT HASN'T, HOW CAN YOU
HONESTLY FIND A CURE FOR THE
ECONOMIC PROBLEMS OF THE COMMON
PEOPLE IF YOU HAVE NO EXPERIENCE
IN WHAT'S AILING THEM?
>> Reporter: PRESIDENT GEORGE
H.W. BUSH WAS CLEARLY CONFUSED
BY WHAT SHE WAS ASKING.
>> WELL, I THINK THE NATIONAL
DEBT AFFECTS EVERYBODY.
>> YOU, ON A PERSONAL BASIS--
HOW HAS IT AFFECTED YOU?
>> HAS IT AFFECTED YOU
PERSONALLY?
>> I'M NOT SURE I GET-- HELP ME
WITH THE QUESTION AND I'LL TRY
TO ANSWER IT.
>> WELL, I'VE HAD FRIENDS THAT
HAVE BEEN LAID OFF FROM JOBS.
>> TELL ME HOW IT'S AFFECTED
YOU, AGAIN.
YOU KNOW PEOPLE WHO'VE LOST
THEIR JOBS AND LOST THEIR HOMES?
>> Reporter: BILL CLINTON, BY
CONTRAST, QUICKLY REACHED OUT
FOR A PERSONAL CONNECTION.
>> WHEN A FACTORY CLOSES, I KNOW
THE PEOPLE WHO RAN IT.
WHEN THE BUSINESSES GO BANKRUPT,
I KNOW THEM.
>> Reporter: THE FORMAT,
UNHINGED FROM LECTERNS AND
TABLES, ALLOW THE CANDIDATES
MUCH MORE MOVEMENT.
BUT THIS CAN BE A DOUBLE-EDGED
SWORD.
IN 2000, VICE PRESIDENT AL GORE
DECIDED TO MOVE INTO GOVERNOR
BUSH'S PERSONAL SPACE, PERHAPS
TO CREATE A SENSE OF DOMINANCE.
BUT WATCH:
>> AND I BELIEVE I CAN.
>> THAT NON-VERBAL GESTURE
PROVED TO BE THE MOST MEMORABLE
MOMENT OF THE ENTIRE DEBATE.
>> Reporter: IN THE 2012 TOWN
HALL, MITT ROMNEY AND PRESIDENT
OBAMA WERE ON THEIR FEET SO
MUCH, IT FELT AT TIMES MORE LIKE
A DUEL THAN A DEBATE.
>> MR. PRESIDENT, HAVE YOU
LOOKED AT YOUR PENSION?
>> I DON'T LOOK AT MY PENSION;
IT'S NOT AS BIG AS YOURS, SO IT
DOESN'T TAKE AS LONG.
>> IF I COULD HAVE YOU SIT DOWN,
GOVERNOR ROMNEY.
THANK YOU.
(overtalk)
>> Reporter: IT IS MOMENTS LIKE
THESE THAT MAKE THE TOWN HALL
MEETING, THE MOST UNPREDICTABLE,
AND FOR THE CANDIDATES, THE
RISKIEST FORMAT OF ALL.
>> AND A REMINDER FOR THIS
EVENING, STAY WITH "PBS
NEWSHOUR" FOR COVERAGE OF THE
SECOND PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE FROM
ST. LOUIS BETWEEN DONALD TRUMP
AND HILLARY CLINTON, LIVE ACROSS
THE COUNTRY AT 9 P.M. EASTERN,
RIGHT HERE ON PBS.
>> Brangham: HURRICANE MATTHEW
HAS BEEN DOWNGRADED TO A POST-
TROPICAL CYCLONE AND HAS NOW
MOVED OUT OVER THE ATLANTIC
OCEAN.
BUT IT CARVED A TRAIL OF DAMAGE
AND FLOODING FROM FLORIDA TO
NORTH CAROLINA AND CAUSED AT
LEAST 19 DEATHS.
AT THE HEIGHT OF THE STORM,
ALMOST THREE MILLION PEOPLE IN
THE SOUTHEAST WERE WITHOUT
POWER.
NORTH CAROLINA WAS THE LAST AND
HARDEST STATE TO BE HIT...WITH
SOME AREAS EXPERIENCING RECORD
FLOODWATERS THE CITY OF
WILMINGTON SAW 18 INCHES OF
RAIN.
GOVERNOR PAT MCCRORY SAID
EMERGENCY RESPONDERS RESCUED
CLOSE TO 900 HUNDRED RESIDENTS
FROM THEIR HOMES AND CARS.
IN FAYETTEVILLE, FIREFIGHTERS
FROM NEW YORK CITY RESCUED
OCCUPANTS OF A CAR THAT WAS
ALMOST COMPLETELY SUBMERGED IN
FLOODWATER.
AND IN HAITI, THERE WERE
FUNERALS TODAY FOR SOME OF THE
ESTIMATED 900 PEOPLE KILLED BY
THE HURRICANE, AND DOCTORS TRY
TO CONTAIN A CHOLERA OUTBREAK.
MATTHEW FIRST HIT THE U.S.
THURSDAY NIGHT, IN FLORIDA.
THE WORST FLOODING THERE
OCCURRED IN THE JACKSONVILLE
METRO AREA.
A HALF HOUR'S DRIVE SOUTH OF
JACKSONVILLE, NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S
HARI SREENIVASAN VISITED
RESIDENTS OF ONE OF AMERICA'S
OLDEST CITIES, ST. AUGUSTINE TO
ASSESS THE DAMAGE.
>> THAT'S THE WATERLINE RIGHT
THERE, THREE FEET.
>> Reporter: TAMARA WILHELM OF
VILANO BEACH, FLORIDA, THOUGHT
PLACING HER VALUABLES A FOOT OFF
THE FLOOR WOULD KEEP THEM SAFE.
BUT THE STORM SURGE FROM
HURRICANE MATTHEW BECAME MUCH
HIGHER.
YOU CAN SEE THE WATER LINE RIGHT
ACROSS YOUR FIREPLACE.
>> YES YOU CAN, YES YOU CAN.
>> Reporter: SO THIS SMELL IS
GOING TO TURN INTO MOLD?
>> YES, IT WILL,
>> Reporter: YOUR COUCHES, YOUR
CARPETS, YOUR RUGS, EVERYTHING?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: IT'S GOT TO BE
REPLACED?
>> YES, YES IT DOES.
>> Reporter: IN HER HOME OF 18
YEARS, THE CARPETS ARE SQUISHY
BENEATH HER FEET, AND THE SUNKEN
SUN ROOM WAS SUBMERGED BY WATER.
WILHELM SAYS SHE EVEN FOUND DEAD
FISH THAT HAD MADE THEIR WAY IN
FROM THE ATLANTIC OCEAN.
THE INLET CAME INTO YOUR HOUSE?
>> YES, IT DID, IT DID. I'M
TRYING NOT TO CRY.
>> Reporter: IT'S A GORGEOUS
PLACE.
>> YES IT IS.
AND WE WILL REBUILD.
AND WE WILL BRUSH IT OFF AND IT
WILL WORK.
>> IT'S GOING TO TAKE A LOT OF
TIME TO CLEAN EVERYTHING UP.
>> Reporter: A FEW MILES AWAY,
MATTHIAS HERZOG IS ALREADY IN
FULL RECOVERY MODE AT HIS HOUSE,
WHICH FACES THE MATANZAS RIVER.
>> THAT'S THE VIEW I DECIDED TO
LIVE HERE, TAKING THE RISK OF
HURRICANES.
THEY SAY IT'S NOT GOING TO
HAPPEN, EVERY HUNDRED YEARS IT
HAPPENS.
>> Reporter: THAT VIEW NOW
INCLUDES A BOAT THAT DID NOT
SURVIVE THE STORM UNSCATHED.
WAS IT UP ONLINE?
>> OH, YEAH.
I TIED IT UP WITH THESE SUPER
TIGHT.
YOU KNOW, I LOOKED IT UP, IT WAS
THIS HEIGHT.
>> Reporter: HIS BOAT FARED
BETTER THAN ONE TWO BLOCKS AWAY
THAT THE HURRICANE PICKED UP AND
DUMPED ON A DEAD END STREET.
AT "CAP'S ON THE WATER"
RESTAURANT, LEAH ATTEBERY'S
CUSTOMERS USED TO BE ABLE TO
SAIL IN FROM THE TOLOMATO RIVER.
BUT NOW THE DOCK IS NOW GONE.
THE STORM SURGE CAUSED HEAVY
KITCHEN EQUIPMENT TO FLOAT ALL
OVER AND SNAPPED LIGHTS BOLTED
INTO THE GROUND.
ATTEBERY SAYS SHE USED TO BE
ABLE SERVE MORE THAN 1,000
PEOPLE A NIGHT.
HOW MANY PEOPLE DOES THIS PLACE
EMPLOY?
>> I'D SAY OVER A HUNDRED.
>> Reporter: SO, FOR A COUPLE OF
WEEKS, A HUNDRED PEOPLE AREN'T
GETTING A PAYCHECK?
WHAT ABOUT ALL THE FOOD THAT YOU
GET IN?
>> WE'LL EITHER HAVE TO POSTPONE
OUR ORDERS.
>> Reporter: THAT MEANS ALL THE
PEOPLE THAT SUPPLY YOU THEY
DON'T HAVE BUSINESS FOR TWO
WEEKS?
>> NO.
>> Reporter: HOW THE REGION
MOVES FORWARD IS ON THE MIND OF
MIKE WANCHICK.
>> YOU'RE LOOKING AT A COUNTY
THAT IS ONE OF THE TOP TEN
FASTEST GROWING COUNTIES IN THE
UNITED STATES.
>> Reporter: WE MET WANCHICK AT
THE EMERGENCY OPERATIONS CENTER
THAT COORDINATED THE LOCAL
RESPONSE TO THE HURRICANE.
HOW DO YOU BUILD RESILIENCE AND
CAPACITY FOR A REGION TO HANDLE
THINGS LIKE THIS IN THE FUTURE?
>> IRONICALLY, STORMS LIKE THIS
DO EXACTLY THAT. THEY MAKE
PEOPLE HAVE A GREATER
UNDERSTANDING OF BUILDING CODES
AND GOVERNMENTAL PROCEDURES, AND
REGULATIONS AND WHY THEY'RE IN
PLACE.
>> Reporter: THE REBUILDING DUE
TO MATTHEW'S DEVASTATION, COUNTY
BY COUNTY, STATE BY STATE, COULD
TAKE YEARS.
>> Brangham: OF ALL THE
REPUBLICAN DEFECTORS FROM DONALD
TRUMP'S CANDIDACY IN THE PAST
TWO DAYS, UTAH HAS LED THE WAY.
THE STATE'S GOVERNOR AND FORMER
GOVERNOR, ONE OF ITS U.S.
SENATORS, AND THREE OF ITS FOUR
MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES-- ALL HAVE NOW
DENOUNCED TRUMP AND SAID THEY
WILL NOT VOTE FOR HIM.
AMONG THAT GROUP IS FIRST-TERM
CONGRESSWOMAN MIA LOVE, WHO
HAPPENS TO BE THE ONLY WOMAN IN
UTAH'S CONGRESSIONAL DELEGATION,
SHE'S ONLY THE FOURTH WOMAN TO
EVER REPRESENT UTAH IN
WASHINGTON SINCE IT BECAME A
STATE IN 1896.
UTAH ALSO HAS A VERY SMALL
NUMBER OF WOMEN IN ITS STATE
LEGISLATURE.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER REPORTS HOW THIS AFFECTS
POLICY IN UTAH, AND WHAT'S BEING
DONE TO ENCOURAGE MORE WOMEN
CANDIDATES.
>> OKAY, ALRIGHT SISTER.
>> Reporter: FOR SOPHIA DICARO,
POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS ARE A FAMILY
AFFAIR.
>> WELL I CAN'T THANK YOU ENOUGH
FOR YOUR SUPPORT.
>> Reporter: THROUGHOUT THE
FALL, DICARO, HER HUSBAND
ROBERT, AND THEIR THREE KIDS,
CARAVAN THROUGH UTAH'S STATE
HOUSE DISTRICT 31.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH WE
APPRECIATE IT.
>> Reporter: FOR DICARO, WHO
PREVIOUSLY WORKED FOR FOUR
GOVERNORS, THE FAMILY'S FULL-
COURT PRESS IS DESIGNED TO HOLD
THE SEAT SHE WON TWO YEARS AGO.
>> YOU KNOW, THESE CAMPAIGN
POLITICS WORLD.
IT'S ONE OF THOSE THINGS THAT
YOU CAN'T REALLY DESCRIBE UNLESS
YOU EXPERIENCE IT FOR YOURSELF.
>> Reporter: AS A REPUBLICAN IN
UTAH, DICARO IS PART OF THE
STATE'S MAJORITY IN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES, BUT AS A WOMEN
IN UTAH POLITICS, SHE'S A
RARITY.
NATIONALLY, ABOUT A QUARTER OF
ALL STATE LEGISLATORS ARE WOMEN.
WITH SIX SENATORS IN ITS 29
MEMBER SENATE AND JUST TEN
REPRESENTATIVES IN ITS 75 MEMBER
HOUSE, UTAH HAS ONE OF THE
LOWEST PERCENTAGES OF FEMALE
LEGISLATORS IN THE COUNTRY.
YET THIS LOW PERCENTAGE LAGS
BEHIND WHAT'S HAPPENING IN THE
WORKFORCE-- 60% OF UTAH'S WOMEN
ARE PARTICIPATING IN THE LABOR
MARKET.
WHY DO YOU THINK SO FEW WOMEN
ARE INVOLVED IN STATE
LEGISLATURE HERE IN UTAH?
>> I THINK THERE'S A NUMBER OF
FACTORS THAT PLAY INTO THAT
QUESTION.
WE HAVE A PART-TIME LEGISLATURE.
IT IS FULL TIME INTENSITY FOR A
45-DAY PERIOD.
SO YOUR FAMILY SITUATION HAS TO
BE SUCH THAT YOU'RE ABLE TO
ACCOMMODATE THAT KIND OF
SCHEDULE.
YOU HAVE TO HAVE THE
AVAILABILITY OF TIME AND YOU
HAVE TO HAVE THE FINANCIAL
ABILITY TO MAKE IT WORK, YOU'RE
NOT PAID VERY MUCH AS A
LEGISLATOR.
>> Reporter: DICARO SAYS HER
ABILITY TO MAKE THE ARRANGEMENT
WORK FOR THE FAMILY IS LARGELY
DUE TO THE SUPPORT SHE RECEIVES
FROM HER HUSBAND.
DO YOU EVER FIND YOURSELF
CONTEMPLATING THE GENDER
QUESTIONS THAT SURROUND
CAMPAIGNS?
DOES THAT COME INTO YOUR WORLD
AT ALL?
>> YOU KNOW, INITIALLY WHEN I
RAN FOR OFFICE, YOU KNOW, THAT
DID COME UP IN OUR CAUCUS
MEETINGS, "ARE YOU GOING TO BE
ABLE TO MANAGE YOUR FAMILY?"
>> Reporter: DO YOU THINK IF YOU
WERE A MAN THEY WOULD HAVE ASKED
YOU THOSE QUESTIONS?
>> NO.
I DON'T.
>> Reporter: YOU CAN'T DISCUSS
WOMEN IN UTAH POLITICS WITHOUT
ADDRESSING THE ROLE OF THE
STATE'S DOMINANT RELIGION-- THE
MORMON CHURCH.
THE MAJORITY OF THE POPULATION
IDENTIFIES AS A MEMBER OF THE
CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF
LATTER-DAY SAINTS.
AT THE SAME TIME, UTAH HAS ONE
OF THE LOWEST PERCENTAGES OF
WOMEN IN STATE LEGISLATURE.
IS IT FAIR TO ASK IF THERE'S A
CORRELATION BETWEEN THE TWO?
>> I THINK IT'S A FAIR QUESTION
TO ASK HOW THE CULTURE IMPACTS
THE GREATER COMMUNITY.
>> Reporter: ALLY ISOM IS THE
CHURCH'S DIRECTOR OF FAMILY AND
COMMUNITY RELATIONS.
>> WE'RE HAVING THE
CONVERSATIONS WITHIN THE CHURCH,
AS AN EMPLOYER, BUT WE'RE ALSO
HAVING THE CONVERSATION WITHIN
THE CHURCH AS A FAITH-BASED
GROUP.
>> Reporter: ALTHOUGH THE MORMON
CHURCH CURRENTLY DOES NOT ALLOW
WOMEN TO BECOME PRIESTS, SHE
BELIEVES THE STATE WOULD BENEFIT
WITH MORE WOMEN IN POLITICS.
>> WE'RE LOOKING AT, WHAT ARE
THE CULTURAL BARRIERS THAT MIGHT
INHIBIT WOMEN FROM STEPPING UP?
AND, DO THEY NEED A LITTLE
ENCOURAGEMENT?
DO THEY NEED TO KNOW THAT THEY
MAKE A DIFFERENCE?
WE NEED WOMEN TO RECOGNIZE THE
VALUE THEY ADD TO PUBLIC POLICY
CONVERSATIONS.
THE QUESTIONS THEY ASK ARE SO
IMPORTANT.
AND TO UNDERSTAND THEY MAKE AN--
A MEANINGFUL DIFFERENCE WHEN
THEY STEP UP AND ENGAGE.
BUT CULTURAL CHANGE SOMETIMES
TAKES SOME TIME.
>> Reporter: WITH PERMISSION
FROM THE CHURCH, ISOM SITS ON
THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF
UTAH'S WOMEN'S LEADERSHIP
INSTITUTE-- A COALITION FORMED
BY THE SALT LAKE CITY BUSINESS
COMMUNITY WORKING TO TRAIN UTAH
WOMEN FOR SENIOR LEADERSHIP
POSITIONS BOTH IN BUSINESS AND
POLITICS.
>> THERE WILL BE PEOPLE WHEN YOU
RUN FOR OFFICE THAT WILL ASK YOU
HOW YOU FEEL ABOUT CERTAIN
THINGS.
>> Reporter: TODAY IS THE FIRST
DAY OF THEIR POLITICAL
DEVELOPMENT SERIES-- DESIGNED TO
TRAIN WOMEN OF ANY PARTY
AFFILIATION HOW TO RUN FOR
OFFICE.
THE SIX MONTH PROGRAM IS LED BY
THE INSTITUTE'S C.E.O.,
PATRICIA JONES.
>> WOMEN MAKE UP MORE THAN HALF
OF THE POPULATION, AND YET WE
HAVE SUCH A SMALL PERCENTAGE OF
WOMEN WHO ARE MAKING POLICY
DECISIONS.
YOU KNOW, I THINK IT WAS OPRAH
WINFREY, ONCE SAID THAT POLITICS
IS SOCIAL WORK WITH POWER.
>> Reporter: FIRST ELECTED IN
THE YEAR 2000, JONES SPENT 14
YEARS AS A DEMOCRATIC STATE
REPRESENTATIVE AND STATE
SENATOR.
>> THE FIRST RACE THAT I HAD, I
DIDN'T KNOW WHAT I WAS DOING.
(LAUGHTER)
YOU KNOW, I KNEW THAT I HAD TO
WALK DOOR TO DOOR, BECAUSE I WAS
A DEMOCRAT.
I RAN AS A DEMOCRAT IN A
REPUBLICAN AREA.
UNDERSTANDING HOW THE SYSTEM
WORKS IS REALLY IMPORTANT TO
YOU, PERSONALLY.
>> Reporter: JONES SPENT MUCH OF
HER TIME IN OFFICE FIGHTING FOR
INCREASED FUNDING FOR PUBLIC
EDUCATION.
SHE SAYS WHILE SHE WAS WARMLY
RECEIVED BY HER MALE COLLEAGUES,
COLLABORATION WAS OFTEN EASIER
WITH WOMEN.
>> I SAW THAT PERSONALLY. YOU
SAW WOMEN, YOU KNOW, WORKING
TOGETHER ON BOTH SIDES OF THE
AISLE WHEN I WAS IN THE
LEGISLATURE.
>> Reporter: UTAH, LIKE MANY
STATES, DOES NOT REQUIRE
COMPANIES TO PROVIDE PAID FAMILY
MEDICAL LEAVE FOR THE ARRIVAL OF
A NEW BABY OR TO CARE FOR A SICK
RELATIVE.
UTAH WORKERS BENEFIT ONLY FROM
THE FEDERAL LAW WHICH ALLOWS FOR
12 WEEKS OF UNPAID LEAVE FROM
THEIR JOBS.
WHAT'S THE CAUSATION OR
CORRELATION BETWEEN THE LACK OF
WOMEN WITHIN STATE LEGISLATURE
AND A LACK OF FAMILY POLICIES
WITHIN THE STATE OF UTAH?
IS THERE A CORRELATION BETWEEN
THE TWO?
>> YES, ABSOLUTELY, THERE HAS TO
BE.
I MEAN, I COULD GIVE YOU
COUNTLESS STORIES ABOUT MY OWN
PERSONAL EXPERIENCE.
YOU'RE OFTEN EITHER THE ONLY
WOMAN, OR ONE OF VERY FEW WOMEN
IN A COMMITTEE, AND THAT IS
REALLY WHERE THE WORK GOES ON IS
AND THESE ARE COMMITTEES THAT
ARE DISCUSSING ISSUES THAT ARE
OF PRIMARY IMPORTANCE TO WOMEN.
>> Reporter: ADVANCING WOMEN'S
ISSUES THROUGH THE LEGISLATURE
IS A GOAL OF THE UTAH WOMEN'S
COALITION RUN BY STEPHANIE
PITCHER.
>> IF WE DON'T HAVE WOMEN UP
THERE SPEAKING AND LENDING THAT
PERSPECTIVE TO THE ISSUE, THEN
WE'RE NOT GOING TO HAVE A POLICY
THAT IS REPRESENTATIVE AND
COMPREHENSIVE TO THE ENTIRETY OF
UTAH'S POPULATION.
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR, PITCHER
WORKED WITH A REPUBLICAN SENATOR
TO PASS A BILL REQUIRING
EMPLOYERS TO PROVIDE REASONABLE
ACCOMMODATIONS FOR PREGNANCY AND
BREASTFEEDING IN THE WORKPLACE.
THIS YEAR, SHE'S WORKING WITH
DEMOCRATIC STATE REPRESENTATIVE
ANGELA ROMERO TO RESURRECT A
BILL GRANTING SIX WEEKS OF PAID
PARENTAL LEAVE FOR STATE AND
UNIVERSITY EMPLOYEES.
>> I THINK STATES LIKE UTAH WANT
TO SHOW THAT THEY'RE FISCALLY
CONSERVATIVE, BUT I FLIP THAT
AND SAY, "WELL, IF WE REALLY
INVEST IN OUR EMPLOYEES, AND WE
PROVIDE THEM WITH THESE
INCENTIVES, THEN THEY'RE GONNA
BE HAPPY IN THEIR JOBS.'
THEY'RE GONNA HAVE HAPPIER
FAMILIES, AND WE'RE GONNA HAVE A
HEALTHIER ECONOMY, LONG-TERM.
>> Reporter: TWO PRIOR ATTEMPTS
TO PASS A PAID FAMILY LEAVE BILL
IN UTAH HAVE FAILED.
TODAY IN THIS INTERIM SESSION,
THE BILL IS ONCE AGAIN UNDER
ECONOMIC SCRUTINY.
>> HAS ANYONE TAKEN A LOOK AT
THAT AND THE COST OF THAT VERSUS
A FIRST BENEFIT?
>> THAT'S MY CONCERN AS WELL,
THAT WE LOOK AT THE FISCAL SIDE
OF THIS VERY CAREFULLY.
>> Reporter: DESPITE THOSE
QUESTIONS, THERE WAS ONE
RECEPTIVE REPUBLICAN--
REPRESENTATIVE SOPHIA DICARO.
>> I'M A LITTLE BIT MORE
INTERESTED IN THE MECHANICS,
BECAUSE I WOULD LIKE TO SEE
SOMETHING LIKE THIS WORK AND
WOULD HATE FOR IT TO GET HUNG UP
DUE TO MECHANICS.
MAYBE I CAN HELP TAKE A LOOK.
AND IT'S NOT ABOUT NECESSARILY
ACCOMMODATING THE WOMAN, IT'S
ABOUT ACCOMMODATING THE FAMILY.
BECAUSE THE HUSBAND'S IMPACTED
JUST AS MUCH.
IT'S A FAMILY AFFAIR SO IF WE
HAVE A WELCOMING ENVIRONMENT FOR
FAMILY, I THINK THAT WOULD ONLY
HELP THIS STATE.
>> WOMEN TEND TO MIGRATE TOWARDS
CERTAIN ISSUES, WHETHER IT'S
PUBLIC ED OR HEALTH, IT'S ISSUES
WHERE YOU KNOW, CHILD CARE, YOU
KNOW, FAMILY LEAVE, AND THAT
SORT OF THING.
BECAUSE THOSE ARE THE LIVES THAT
THEY'VE LIVED.
BUT TO HAVE THE POWER TO
ACTUALLY MAKE CHANGE IS REALLY
WHAT'S IMPORTANT-- THAT WOMEN
UNDERSTAND THE POWER THAT YOU
CAN HAVE.
AND THERE'S NOTHING WRONG WITH
THE WORD POWER.
SUZANNE'S RUNNING FOR, YOU ARE
RUNNING FOR THE HOUSE AREN'T
YOU?
>> Reporter: SUZANNE HARRISON IS
ONE OF 40 WOMEN IN JONES'
POLITICAL DEVELOPMENT SERIES
THIS YEAR.
>> THANK YOU ALL FOR COMING!
>> Reporter: AN ANESTHESIOLOGIST
AND MEMBER OF THE MORMON CHURCH,
THE FIRST TIME CANDIDATE IS
RUNNING AS A DEMOCRAT FOR STATE
HOUSE DISTRICT 32, JUST OUTSIDE
SALT LAKE CITY.
SO YOU ARE RUNNING FOR OFFICE
FOR THE FIRST TIME.
WHY?
>> MOSTLY 'CAUSE I'M A MOM.
AND THIS IS A PRIORITY FOR OUR
FAMILY.
WE HAVE SOME OF THE LARGEST
CLASS SIZES IN THE WHOLE COUNTRY
AND WE HAVE THE LOWEST IN PER
PUPIL SPENDING IN THE WHOLE
COUNTRY AND I FEEL LIKE THAT'S
WRONG.
THAT'S NOT WHERE MY VALUES ARE.
THAT'S NOT MY PRIORITY AS A MOM
AND AS A DOCTOR.
I VALUE PUBLIC EDUCATION AND I
WANT THAT TO BE A PRIORITY IN
THIS STATE.
>> Reporter: THIS NOVEMBER WOMEN
ARE COMPETING FOR 35 SEATS IN
THE UTAH HOUSE AND SENATE.
IF, IN THE UNLIKELY EVENT THEY
WIN ALL 35, THIS WOULD MORE THAN
DOUBLE THE PERCENTAGE OF WOMEN
IN STATE GOVERNMENT, BUT WOMEN
WOULD STILL ONLY OCCUPY A THIRD
OF THE UTAH STATE LEGISLATURE.
>> I'M AN ANESTHESIOLOGIST.
I'M A PHYSICIAN.
MY FIRST PRIORITIES ARE TO
FAMILIES AND TO MY PATIENTS.
AND WE COULD USE SOME MORE OF
THOSE KIND OF VIEWPOINTS IN THE
LEGISLATURE.
THERE'S A LOT OF PEOPLE IN REAL
ESTATE.
A LOT OF PEOPLE THAT ARE
DEVELOPERS.
THERE ARE NOT VERY MANY
PHYSICIANS, AND THERE'S NOT A
LOT OF MOMS.
AND THOSE PERSPECTIVES REALLY
MATTER.
>> LEARN WHY NEW YORK CITY
TRIPLED THE NUMBER OF LANGUAGES
ON VOTER REGISTRATION FORMS.
VISIT PBS.ORG/NEWSHOUR.
>> Brangham: IN SOUTH KOREA
TODAY, SAMANTHA POWER, THE U.S.
AMBASSADOR TO THE UNITED NATIONS
VISITED THE DE-MILITARIZED ZONE
BORDERING NORTH KOREA.
HER VISIT COMES BARELY A MONTH
AFTER THE NORTH CARRIED OUT ITS
FIFTH NUCLEAR WEAPONS TEST.
LATER, IN SEOUL, POWER SAID THE
U.S. WILL USE ECONOMIC SANCTIONS
AND MILITARY DETERRENCE TO
ISOLATE THE NORTH.
>> WE ARE COMMITTED TO USING ALL
THE TOOLS IN OUR TOOLKIT TO
ADDRESS THE SERIOUS THREAT,
INCLUDING DIPLOMATIC PRESSURE
THAT WE ARE MOBILIZING AROUND
THE WORLD TO CONVINCE OTHER
NATIONS TO ISOLATE THE REGIME.
>> Brangham: THE WHITE HOUSE IS
REVIEWING AMERICA'S SUPPORT FOR
THE SAUDI-LED COALITION THAT'S
BATTLING SHIITE REBELS IN YEMEN
THIS FOLLOWING YESTERDAY'S AIR
ATTACK ON A FUNERAL IN THE
REBEL-HELD CAPITAL.
THE WHITE HOUSE SAID BACKING THE
SAUDI CAMPAIGN DOES NOT
CONSTITUTE A "BLANK CHECK."
TODAY, THOUSANDS OF YEMENIS
DEMONSTRATED OUTSIDE THE UNITED
NATIONS HEADQUARTERS IN YEMEN
AND CALLED FOR AN INVESTIGATION.
THE U.N. SAYS THE BOMBING KILLED
AT LEAST 140 PEOPLE AND WOUNDED
525 MORE.
IT WAS ONE OF THE MOST LETHAL
INCIDENTS IN YEMEN'S 18-MONTH-
LONG CIVIL WAR.
AT THE VATICAN TODAY, POPE
FRANCIS NAMED HIS FIRST AMERICAN
CARDINALS.
ALL ARE CONSIDERED TO BE
MODERATES, AND THEY ARE CHICAGO
ARCHBISHOP BLASE CUPICH,
INDIANAPOLIS ARCHBISHOP JOSEPH
TOBIN, AND KEVIN FARRELL, THE
OUTGOING BISHOP OF DALLAS.
IN ALL, FRANCIS NAMED 17 NEW
CARDINALS FROM FIVE CONTINENTS.
13 OF WHOM ARE UNDER THE AGE OF
80, WHICH MEANS THEY WOULD BE
ELIGIBLE TO VOTE FOR OR BECOME
THE NEXT POPE.
FINALLY, ANOTHER REMINDER TO
JOIN US LATER THIS EVENING FOR
COVERAGE OF THE SECOND
PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE FROM
ST. LOUIS BETWEEN HILLARY
CLINTON AND DONALD TRUMP LIVE AT
9 P.M. EASTERN RIGHT HERE ON
PBS.
THAT'S ALL FOR PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
I'M WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
GOOD NIGHT.